# Release Procedure
We have release procedures for the following scenarios:

1. [cBioPortal community release of code already in production](#cbioportal-community-release-of-code-already-in-production)
2. [New Feature Release](#new-feature-release)

## cBioPortal community release of code already in production
We often run code in production that is not ready yet for use by the wider
cBioPortal community. We deploy to production what's in the master branch of
the backend repo and the frontend repo. Often times this is not a tagged
release. At some point this code should be released for the wider community.
These are the steps we follow:

1. Create a new frontend tag. The releases can be found here:
   https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal-frontend/releases. A draft of the release notes are automatically generated by https://github.com/marketplace/actions/release-drafter. If there are pull requests in the `Changes` section i.e. they have not been labeled with one of the labels defined [here](https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal-frontend/blob/master/.github/release-drafter.yml). Try to label them and trigger a rerun by committing something to the master branch. Alternatively you can manually put them in a particular section. Note that our goal is to have automated release notes, so it would be great if you could send a PR to update the [release-drafter.yml](https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal-frontend/blob/master/.github/release-drafter.yml) in case you find certain PRs don't fit in a particular section or a section should be altered. Look at other release notes for inspiration:
   https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal-frontend/releases. You can save
   your work as a draft if necessary.
2. Once the frontend code is tagged, create a pull request to the backend repo
   where the frontend version is incremented in `portal/pom.xml`:
   ```
	  <groupId>com.github.cbioportal</groupId>
	  <artifactId>cbioportal-frontend</artifactId>
	  <version>CHANGE_THIS_TO_THE_FRONTEND_TAG</version>
   ```
3. Once that PR is merged, one can create a tag for the backend repo with the
   same tag as the frontend repo. You should see a draft from release drafter similar to the frontend in the backend repo: https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal/releases. The idea is to create one set of release notes in the backend repo that is a combination of the frontend and backend notes. To make the hyperlinks from the frontend repo work in the backend repo you can copy the frontend release notes raw markdown and run the following one liner to convert the links:
   
   ```
   pbpaste | sed 's|(#\(....\)|([#\1](https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal-frontend/pull/\1))|g'
   ```
   then put them in the right sections following same style as other releases: https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal-frontend/releases.
4. Create a news item with a link to your carefully crafted release notes. Highlight a few major changes that could be interesting to users of cBioPortal ideally with a screenshot similar to: https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal/pull/6914/files?short_path=6f95322#diff-6f953229832059bab3fe229d4af08b52 (in the files changed section, you can click on view rich diff to see the converted markdown). 
   
## Release with database migration
For releases with database migrations, we increase the MINOR number in MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH.
For those releases we have a separate branch (see
https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#branches-within-cbioportal),
which needs to be merged to master on both backend and frontend:

1. Make sure no auto deployment is running for frontend from netlify
2. Merge frontend release-x.y.z branch to frontend master
3. Follow same procedure as for [a PATCH
   release](#cbioportal-community-release-of-code-already-in-production),
   but instead of having a separate PR to update the frontend (step 2) one can
   add it to the already existing backend branch release-x.y.z and open the PR
   from there to backend's master. This is merely for convenience to avoid
   having to create another branch just to update the frontend version.

## A note on versioning
We follow the following logic when deciding how/when to increment the version
of cBioPortal. It's a complete modification of semantic versioning
(MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH) more suitable for our purposes:

MAJOR
: A big change in how cBioPortal works. We changed the major version from 1 to
2 when we completely moved from using JSPs to a Single Page App written in
React calling a REST service. Another example: we changed from 2 to 3 when we made session-service a requirement.

MINOR
: Changes that require a database migration

PATCH
: Changes that don't require database migrations. Could be new features as well as bug fixes to either frontend, backend or both.

See also: https://github.com/cBioPortal/cbioportal/releases
